README.md, before:

# Nordic Testing Days Workshop

Time: 13:30 - 15:30 EEST (GMT+3), June 3rd, 2022 - https://sched.co/zanV

### Attendee Preconditions:
- Laptop that can run Kubernetes
- GitHub account with possibility to create public repositories

### Tools that will be installed on local machine during the workshop

If you want to get ahead of things you can install
- Docker / Kubernetes / Kubectl to set up a local k8s cluster
  - Optional: Google Cloud CLI if you want to use our provided cluster instead
- Cypress
- Postman
- In local cluster:
  - Petstore sample app
  - Testkube
  
## Workshop Steps 

### 1. Install Kubernetes 

- Install Docker
- Install Kubernetes - one of:
  - Minikube: download / install from https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/
  - Kind: https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation
  - Docker: enable Kubernetes ?
- Install kubectl: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/
- Test installation with kubectl commands:

```
kubectl get all
kubectl get all -n kube-system
```

(as long as you don't get any errors - output will vary)

#### Backup if you can't install Kubernetes

You can use our temporary cluster instead - but you will still need to install kubectl and the Google Cloud CLI
- Install kubectl from https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/
- Install Google Cloud CLI from https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install
- Download [provided kubeconfig](kubeconfig/ntd-kubeconfig) to a local file
- Replace `PATHTOGOOGLECLOUDSDK` in the downloaded file with the path where you installed the gcloud SDK
- Set a local KUBECONFIG env variable to point to the downloaded file
- Test installation with same kubectl commands as above

#### If you can't install either Kubernetes or Kubectl/Google Cloud CLI then skip this step!

### 2. Install Demo Application in local cluster 

Steps:
1. Download and apply [petstore deployment](petstore/deployment.yaml) to your local cluster:

```
kubectl apply -f petstore-deployment.yaml
```

You should see a success message... now run

```
kubectl get all
```

which should eventually show the deployed petstore service (could take a while):

```
NAME                            READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
pod/petstore-749fbb9656-6mp7z   1/1     Running   0          17h
pod/petstore-749fbb9656-g9f69   1/1     Running   0          17h
pod/petstore-749fbb9656-tbkxb   1/1     Running   0          17h

NAME                 TYPE        CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
service/petstore     ClusterIP   10.15.247.121   <none>        80/TCP    17h

NAME                       READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
deployment.apps/petstore   3/3     3            3           17h

NAME                                  DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
replicaset.apps/petstore-749fbb9656   3         3         3       17h
```

2. Set up port-forwarding and access through browser / CURL locally

You now have Petstore running in local kubernetes cluster - run the following command to 
expose it from your cluster so you can access it through your browser:

```
kubectl port-forward deployment/petstore 8888:8080
..
Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:8888 -> 8080
Forwarding from [::1]:8888 -> 8080
```

Open your browser and point it to http://localhost:8888 - you should see the Swagger-UI

![images/swaggerui.png](images/swaggerui.png)

#### Backup - if you weren't able to install Petstore locally:

Use [hosted Petstore](https://petstore.testkube.io/) instead - you should see the same Petstore as above.

### 3. Install Cypress & Create tests 

Steps:
1. Download and install from cypress.io
2. Create empty folder for tests
3. Create new project for the empty folder
4. Delete sample tests
5. Create a new test named "petstore.spec.js"
6. Open that file in your IDE and replace its contents with the following:
```javascript
describe('Petstore Testing', () => {
    it('Visits PetStore', () => {
        cy.visit('http://localhost:8888/')
        // cy.visit('https://petstore.testkube.io/') - uncomment if using public petstore
        cy.get('.title').should('contain.text', "Swagger Petstore - OpenAPI 3.0")
    })
})
```

8. Run test in Cypress runner
![img.png](images/cypress-test.png)
9. Add some more assertions / actions to test - see https://docs.cypress.io/guides/core-concepts/interacting-with-elements 

*If you have access to a public GitHub repo*

10. Add a package.json file to your local folder containing the following (required by Testkube in stop):
```json
{
  "name": "cypress-petstore-test",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "petstore.spec.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "cypress run petstore.spec.js"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC",
  "devDependencies": {
    "cypress": "^8.5.0"
  }
}
```
11. Add the entire folder to your Git repo and push it to GitHub

#### Backup : watch the live demo!

Precreated Cypress tests for hosted petstore are available in [cypress folder](cypress)

### 4. Install Postman & Create API Tests 

Steps:

1. Install and run Postman Desktop app
2. Create empty workspace
3. Import PetStore OpenAPI def from https://petstore.testkube.io/api/v3/openapi.json
4. Set collection-level baseUrl variable to the endpoint of your local service - or to the hosted petstore url `https://petstore.testkube.io/api/v3`
![img.png](images/postman-set-baseurl.png)
5. Execute GET store/inventory operation, make sure you get a response
6. Create simple test for inventory response - add test script that validates the approved property:
```javascript
pm.test("My first test", function () {
    var jsonData = pm.response.json();
    pm.expect(jsonData.approved).to.eql(50);
});
```
7. Run operation to see that test passes
![img_1.png](images/postman-run-test.png)
8. Remove all other operations from collection so only the inventory is left
9. Export collection to local file

#### Backup : watch the live demo!

Precreated Postman tests for hosted Petstore API are available in [postman folder](postman)

### 5. Install Testkube or access hosted Testkube

We'll start with a short overview of Testkube and will show the hosted dashboard.

Steps:
1. Install Testkube - https://kubeshop.github.io/testkube/installing/
2. Run `kubectl testkube version` to validate installation / access
```shell
➜  dev kubectl testkube version

████████ ███████ ███████ ████████ ██   ██ ██    ██ ██████  ███████
   ██    ██      ██         ██    ██  ██  ██    ██ ██   ██ ██
   ██    █████   ███████    ██    █████   ██    ██ ██████  █████
   ██    ██           ██    ██    ██  ██  ██    ██ ██   ██ ██
   ██    ███████ ███████    ██    ██   ██  ██████  ██████  ███████
                                           /tɛst kjub/ by Kubeshop


Client Version 1.2.7
Server Version v1.2.6
Commit
Built by Homebrew
Build date
➜  dev
```
3. Access Testkube dashboard locally using `kubectl testkube dashboard` command:
```shell
➜  dev kubectl testkube dashboard

The dashboard is accessible here: http://localhost:8080/apiEndpoint?apiEndpoint=localhost:8088/v1 🥇
The API is accessible here: http://localhost:8088/v1/info 🥇
Port forwarding is started for the test results endpoint, hit Ctrl+c (or Cmd+c) to stop 🥇
```

#### Backup: use hosted cluster

Go to Testkube dashboard at https://workshop.testkube.io

### 6. Add Tests to Testkube with UI

Steps:
1. Add exported Postman collection as test in dashboard 
![img.png](images/add-postman-test.png)
You should see the added test in the list of tests
![img_2.png](images/added-postman-test.png)
2. Add Cypress test from Git repository in dashboard
![img_1.png](images/add-cypress-test.png)
You should see the added test in the list of tests
![img_3.png](images/added-cypress-test.png)

#### Backup: Create tests in hosted cluster

Same as above but use hosted dashboard instead
- You can use the provided Cypress / Postman tests if you weren't able to create these locally
- Be sure to use unique names for the created tests since other attendees might be doing the same!

### 7. Run Tests with Testkube through UI or CLI

Steps:
1. Run Tests in local Testkube using Dashboard or CLI and see results in Dashboard
![img_4.png](images/executed-postman-test.png)
![img.png](images/executed-cypress-test.png)

#### Backup 

- Run provided tests using either CLI or UI in hosted cluster

### 8. Create & Run TestSuite containing both API and UI tests

This step requires a working CLI since Testsuites can't yet be created using the UI. Our Testsuite will 
run both above created tests in sequence with a 1 second paused in between:

```json
{
  "name": "workshop-testkube-testsuite",
  "description": "Sample Testkube Testsuite",
  "steps": [
    {
      "execute": {
        "name": "my-postman-collection"
      }
    },
    {
      "delay": {
        "duration": 1000
      }
    },
    {
      "execute": {
        "name": "my-cypress-test"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

See provided [testsuite.json](testsuite/testsuite.json) file.

Steps:
1. Create TestSuite using CLI 
- save the above to a file
- replace the names of the referenced tests with the ones you created 
- pass the file to `kubectl testkube create testsuite` with the following command:
```
cat testsuite/testsuite.json | kubectl testkube create testsuite --name <your unique testsuite name>
TestSuite created ... 🥇
```

You should now see the created Testsuite in the UI:
![img.png](images/created-testsuite.png)

2. Run TestSuite through dashboard or CLI and see results:
![img_1.png](images/testsuite-executing.png)

#### Backup 

- Run provided Testsuite in hosted cluster using dashboard UI

### 9. Schedule test execution from CI/CD 

We will show how to automate the execution of a testsuite using GitHub actions - have a look 
at the [run-testsuite.yaml](.github/workflows/run-testsuite.yaml) workflow.

Steps: 
- Watch demo using GitHub repo and hosted Testkube!

## Nice Work!

If you got this far you are on your way to kubernetes testing nirvana - congrats!

Commit message:

Add Slides to the readme

README.md, after:

# Nordic Testing Days Workshop

Time: 13:30 - 15:30 EEST (GMT+3), June 3rd, 2022 - https://sched.co/zanV

### Attendee Preconditions:
- Laptop that can run Kubernetes
- GitHub account with possibility to create public repositories

### Tools that will be installed on local machine during the workshop

If you want to get ahead of things you can install
- Docker / Kubernetes / Kubectl to set up a local k8s cluster
  - Optional: Google Cloud CLI if you want to use our provided cluster instead
- Cypress
- Postman
- In local cluster:
  - Petstore sample app
  - Testkube

### Slides
[Testing your Kubernetes applications with Cypress and Postman - Tallinn 2022](https://github.com/kubeshop/nordictestingdays-2022/files/8819304/Testing.your.Kubernetes.applications.with.Cypress.and.Postman.-.Tallinn.pdf)

## Workshop Steps 

### 1. Install Kubernetes 

- Install Docker
- Install Kubernetes - one of:
  - Minikube: download / install from https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/
  - Kind: https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation
  - Docker: enable Kubernetes ?
- Install kubectl: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/
- Test installation with kubectl commands:

```
kubectl get all
kubectl get all -n kube-system
```

(as long as you don't get any errors - output will vary)

#### Backup if you can't install Kubernetes

You can use our temporary cluster instead - but you will still need to install kubectl and the Google Cloud CLI
- Install kubectl from https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/
- Install Google Cloud CLI from https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install
- Download [provided kubeconfig](kubeconfig/ntd-kubeconfig) to a local file
- Replace `PATHTOGOOGLECLOUDSDK` in the downloaded file with the path where you installed the gcloud SDK
- Set a local KUBECONFIG env variable to point to the downloaded file
- Test installation with same kubectl commands as above

#### If you can't install either Kubernetes or Kubectl/Google Cloud CLI then skip this step!

### 2. Install Demo Application in local cluster 

Steps:
1. Download and apply [petstore deployment](petstore/deployment.yaml) to your local cluster:

```
kubectl apply -f petstore-deployment.yaml
```

You should see a success message... now run

```
kubectl get all
```

which should eventually show the deployed petstore service (could take a while):

```
NAME                            READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
pod/petstore-749fbb9656-6mp7z   1/1     Running   0          17h
pod/petstore-749fbb9656-g9f69   1/1     Running   0          17h
pod/petstore-749fbb9656-tbkxb   1/1     Running   0          17h

NAME                 TYPE        CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
service/petstore     ClusterIP   10.15.247.121   <none>        80/TCP    17h

NAME                       READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
deployment.apps/petstore   3/3     3            3           17h

NAME                                  DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
replicaset.apps/petstore-749fbb9656   3         3         3       17h
```

2. Set up port-forwarding and access through browser / CURL locally

You now have Petstore running in local kubernetes cluster - run the following command to 
expose it from your cluster so you can access it through your browser:

```
kubectl port-forward deployment/petstore 8888:8080
..
Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:8888 -> 8080
Forwarding from [::1]:8888 -> 8080
```

Open your browser and point it to http://localhost:8888 - you should see the Swagger-UI

![images/swaggerui.png](images/swaggerui.png)

#### Backup - if you weren't able to install Petstore locally:

Use [hosted Petstore](https://petstore.testkube.io/) instead - you should see the same Petstore as above.

### 3. Install Cypress & Create tests 

Steps:
1. Download and install from cypress.io
2. Create empty folder for tests
3. Create new project for the empty folder
4. Delete sample tests
5. Create a new test named "petstore.spec.js"
6. Open that file in your IDE and replace its contents with the following:
```javascript
describe('Petstore Testing', () => {
    it('Visits PetStore', () => {
        cy.visit('http://localhost:8888/')
        // cy.visit('https://petstore.testkube.io/') - uncomment if using public petstore
        cy.get('.title').should('contain.text', "Swagger Petstore - OpenAPI 3.0")
    })
})
```

8. Run test in Cypress runner
![img.png](images/cypress-test.png)
9. Add some more assertions / actions to test - see https://docs.cypress.io/guides/core-concepts/interacting-with-elements 

*If you have access to a public GitHub repo*

10. Add a package.json file to your local folder containing the following (required by Testkube in stop):
```json
{
  "name": "cypress-petstore-test",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "petstore.spec.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "cypress run petstore.spec.js"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC",
  "devDependencies": {
    "cypress": "^8.5.0"
  }
}
```
11. Add the entire folder to your Git repo and push it to GitHub

#### Backup : watch the live demo!

Precreated Cypress tests for hosted petstore are available in [cypress folder](cypress)

### 4. Install Postman & Create API Tests 

Steps:

1. Install and run Postman Desktop app
2. Create empty workspace
3. Import PetStore OpenAPI def from https://petstore.testkube.io/api/v3/openapi.json
4. Set collection-level baseUrl variable to the endpoint of your local service - or to the hosted petstore url `https://petstore.testkube.io/api/v3`
![img.png](images/postman-set-baseurl.png)
5. Execute GET store/inventory operation, make sure you get a response
6. Create simple test for inventory response - add test script that validates the approved property:
```javascript
pm.test("My first test", function () {
    var jsonData = pm.response.json();
    pm.expect(jsonData.approved).to.eql(50);
});
```
7. Run operation to see that test passes
![img_1.png](images/postman-run-test.png)
8. Remove all other operations from collection so only the inventory is left
9. Export collection to local file

#### Backup : watch the live demo!

Precreated Postman tests for hosted Petstore API are available in [postman folder](postman)

### 5. Install Testkube or access hosted Testkube

We'll start with a short overview of Testkube and will show the hosted dashboard.

Steps:
1. Install Testkube - https://kubeshop.github.io/testkube/installing/
2. Run `kubectl testkube version` to validate installation / access
```shell
➜  dev kubectl testkube version

████████ ███████ ███████ ████████ ██   ██ ██    ██ ██████  ███████
   ██    ██      ██         ██    ██  ██  ██    ██ ██   ██ ██
   ██    █████   ███████    ██    █████   ██    ██ ██████  █████
   ██    ██           ██    ██    ██  ██  ██    ██ ██   ██ ██
   ██    ███████ ███████    ██    ██   ██  ██████  ██████  ███████
                                           /tɛst kjub/ by Kubeshop


Client Version 1.2.7
Server Version v1.2.6
Commit
Built by Homebrew
Build date
➜  dev
```
3. Access Testkube dashboard locally using `kubectl testkube dashboard` command:
```shell
➜  dev kubectl testkube dashboard

The dashboard is accessible here: http://localhost:8080/apiEndpoint?apiEndpoint=localhost:8088/v1 🥇
The API is accessible here: http://localhost:8088/v1/info 🥇
Port forwarding is started for the test results endpoint, hit Ctrl+c (or Cmd+c) to stop 🥇
```

#### Backup: use hosted cluster

Go to Testkube dashboard at https://workshop.testkube.io

### 6. Add Tests to Testkube with UI

Steps:
1. Add exported Postman collection as test in dashboard 
![img.png](images/add-postman-test.png)
You should see the added test in the list of tests
![img_2.png](images/added-postman-test.png)
2. Add Cypress test from Git repository in dashboard
![img_1.png](images/add-cypress-test.png)
You should see the added test in the list of tests
![img_3.png](images/added-cypress-test.png)

#### Backup: Create tests in hosted cluster

Same as above but use hosted dashboard instead
- You can use the provided Cypress / Postman tests if you weren't able to create these locally
- Be sure to use unique names for the created tests since other attendees might be doing the same!

### 7. Run Tests with Testkube through UI or CLI

Steps:
1. Run Tests in local Testkube using Dashboard or CLI and see results in Dashboard
![img_4.png](images/executed-postman-test.png)
![img.png](images/executed-cypress-test.png)

#### Backup 

- Run provided tests using either CLI or UI in hosted cluster

### 8. Create & Run TestSuite containing both API and UI tests

This step requires a working CLI since Testsuites can't yet be created using the UI. Our Testsuite will 
run both above created tests in sequence with a 1 second paused in between:

```json
{
  "name": "workshop-testkube-testsuite",
  "description": "Sample Testkube Testsuite",
  "steps": [
    {
      "execute": {
        "name": "my-postman-collection"
      }
    },
    {
      "delay": {
        "duration": 1000
      }
    },
    {
      "execute": {
        "name": "my-cypress-test"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

See provided [testsuite.json](testsuite/testsuite.json) file.

Steps:
1. Create TestSuite using CLI 
- save the above to a file
- replace the names of the referenced tests with the ones you created 
- pass the file to `kubectl testkube create testsuite` with the following command:
```
cat testsuite/testsuite.json | kubectl testkube create testsuite --name <your unique testsuite name>
TestSuite created ... 🥇
```

You should now see the created Testsuite in the UI:
![img.png](images/created-testsuite.png)

2. Run TestSuite through dashboard or CLI and see results:
![img_1.png](images/testsuite-executing.png)

#### Backup 

- Run provided Testsuite in hosted cluster using dashboard UI

### 9. Schedule test execution from CI/CD 

We will show how to automate the execution of a testsuite using GitHub actions - have a look 
at the [run-testsuite.yaml](.github/workflows/run-testsuite.yaml) workflow.

Steps: 
- Watch demo using GitHub repo and hosted Testkube!

## Nice Work!

If you got this far you are on your way to kubernetes testing nirvana - congrats!
